.. include:: links.rst

.. _basic-circuits-guide:

Basic Circuits
==============

This first section is about establishing core electrical concepts and
standard vocabulary for talking about electronics. Everybody in the
class is starting from a different level of experience (perhaps none)
but needs to develop a common language for working together.

The following list is an informal summary of basic electrical concepts
which will be used throughout the course. Please read through everything
and keep this for reference. If the terminology is unfamiliar, it will
become familiar through practice with the exercises. If it is review,
then please help your classmates with understanding the exercises.

Takeaway Lessons
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Electricity is the flow of electrons through a conductor.

Electricity is invisible; we use instruments such as multimeters and
oscilloscopes to measure it and render it visible.

An electrical current conveys energy.

Electric potential is measured in volts. Potential can exist between any
two points in a circuit or conductor; it is a relative measure. It is a
measure of potential energy, and exists whether or not a current is
flowing between those two points.

Electric current is measured in amperes (amps). Current is the volume of
electron flow past a point.

Electrical currents can vary with time. The simplest case is the AC
(alternating current) wall power in which the voltage is formed as a 60
Hz sine wave (in the US) for transmission efficiency. In contrast, our
lab power supplies and batteries will output DC (direct current) which
has a constant voltage.

An electrical current can encode information.

Information can be conveyed even with very small amounts of energy. In
practice there are very different kinds of electrical signals and
circuits for processing information (e.g. from sensors) versus actuating
mechanical systems (e.g. motors, speakers).

An electric potential across a *resistance* causes a current to flow
through it. Resistance is measured in ohms and is measured along a
pathway through a conductor.

Virtually all materials have a finite *resistivity*, which is a property
of the material. The resistance of a path through a material is a
function of the resistivity and the length and cross-section of the
conductive path. Longer and thinner wires have more resistance, shorter
and thicker wires have less resistance. Copper has lower resistivity
than aluminum or steel; silver is better yet.

A current flowing through a resistance converts electrical energy to
heat. This is commonly termed *dissipation*.

An insulator is a material with very high resistance, i.e., a typical
voltage will cause negligible current flow through it.

The relationship between current, voltage, and resistance in an
electrical path is described by Ohm's Law: V = i \* R, in which V
represents a voltage measured across a resistance R through which
current i is flowing. Ohm's Law can be trivially rewritten as i = V / R
and R = V / i.

Electricity flow is loosely analogous to water flow: current is
analogous to the volume of flow of water through a pipe, voltage is
analogous to the pressure difference between two locations, and
resistance is analogous to friction. However, it is good practice to
think directly in terms of electrical properties rather than relying on
this comparison.

A resistor is a type of electronic component engineered for a precise
and constant resistance property. Resistors are designed with a
guaranteed minimum capability for dissipating energy. In general,
physically larger resistors have more dissipation capacity. Resistors
come in a variety of physical shapes and means of electrical connection.
No resistor is precisely the specified value; resistors are specified
with a tolerance range. Highly precise resistors generally cost more. In
practice, resistors have no dynamic behavior.

Resistors have a constant value for any voltage and current within their
rating. Ohm's Law for a resistor means that current and voltage follow a
simple linear relationship given a constant R.

Wires can be viewed as resistors with low resistance values. Ideally the
resistance is low enough not to affect circuit operation, but in
circuits delivering energy the wire resistance needs to be considered.

A *short-circuit* (or "short") is an unintended low-resistance
connection between two points, e.g. bare wires touching accidentally, a
stray drop of solder bridging two pins, or a DMM probe touching two
circuit board traces. The effects of a short can range from nothing to
smoke and destruction, depending on the location and available energy.

In practice, resistors are used to relate current and voltage within a
circuit rather than to generate heat. Heat is normally an undesirable
side-effect.

There are many other types of passive and active components: capacitors,
inductors, diodes, transistors, LEDs, lamps, integrated circuits,
motors, solenoids, and thousands more.

Unlike resistors, most components do not have a simple constant
resistance.

The DMM (digital multi-meter) measures fundamental properties of an
electrical signal: voltage and current. It also measures electrical
properties of materials (either components or conductors): resistance,
capacitance, and inductance. The DMM is most useful for measuring
relatively constant properties, as the numeric display doesn't show
rapid variation well.

Measuring voltage with a DMM requires attaching it between two points,
since voltage is a relative measure.

Measuring current with a DMM requires routing a signal *through* the
meter, since current is a measurement of flow. This frequently requires
modifying the circuit by *opening* a connection and replacing it with
the path through the meter. The meter itself has a different physical
connection point for measuring current that offers a low-resistance
path: for this reason it is very important not to use the current input
unless actually measuring current, otherwise you will short out a
circuit and potentially damage the meter.

The oscilloscope draws a dynamic graph of the voltage of an electrical
signal. It is most useful for visualizing time-varying signals. The
oscilloscope can plot a signal over many orders of magnitude of time
scale; in the course we will generally deal with signals varying at
scales ranging from microseconds to seconds, but modern electronics
involves signals at nanosecond scales and shorter. In contrast, human
perception operates at scales closer to tenths of a second.

Sensors are transducers which convert a physical signal to an electrical
signal. Some common transducers have variable resistance, e.g., for a
given voltage across them, the current through them will vary depending
upon physical state. Two examples: a switch has a resistance near zero
or near infinity depending on position, a CdS photocell has a resistance
varying from about 1000 ohms to millions of ohms depending on light
intensity. Sensors can have a time-varying response: the switch changes
resistance near-instantly, the CdS photocell can take hundreds of
milliseconds to respond to a sudden change. There exists a vast variety
of sensors to couple nearly any physical process of interest into
electrical information. Optical sensors are especially useful building
blocks since many other physical effects can be transduced to a
variation in light, and then transduced from light to a variation in
electricity.

Circuits are arrangements of components and conductors engineered for a
particular purpose. You must learn to recognize certain fundamental
circuit structures which will be used throughout the course.

A circuit is a graph; circuit topology matters more than exact physical
layout. This becomes less true at the extremes: low-voltage,
high-current, or high-frequency circuits require more attention to
physical layout. For this course this will come into play with DC motor
circuits.

Electrical engineering has been wildly successful at providing means for
converting energy and information to and from electrical form and
providing tools for manipulating electrical energy and information.
Historically, computation and signal processing has also been performed
in other domains. The first closed-loop control system was actually a
mechanical computation performed with a flyball governor. Elaborate
mechanical computers were constructed to represent mathematical
functions before the advent of electronic computing. Analog electronic
computers were used before digital electronic computers were developed.
None of these methods have scaled to the complexity of digital
computing, but all still have application for particular problems.

Analog circuits refer to systems in which the energy or information is
represented by continuously varying electrical signals. E.g. a
photoresistor exhibits a continuously varying resistance as a function
of the incident light, and in a circuit can be wired to produce a
continuously varying voltage or current. A microphone produces a voltage
proportional to air pressure and represents sound as an oscillating
voltage.

Digital signals are discretized signals in which specific values of
voltage or current are defined to represent specific symbols. In the
most common case, only two symbols are represented, labeled zero and
one. This encodes a single binary digit, or *bit*, as the current or
voltage on a wire.

The specific values of voltage or current representing a digital symbol
depend on the specific components. The Arduino follows the 5V CMOS
convention, so voltages below 1.5V are considered zero or LOW and
voltages above 3.7V are considered one or HIGH. Voltages in-between are
potentially ambiguous but will be arbitrated into a distinct value when
passing through a digital input. Please note that other microcontrollers
such as the Arduino Due operate at 3.3V and circuits in laptops and cell
phones at even lower voltages, so these thresholds will be different.
Connecting between different logic families can require
level-translation circuitry if the values are not compatible.

*Schematics* are circuit diagrams showing the logical connection of
electronic components. A schematic does not define the physical layout
of components or conductors, so constructing a circuit from a schematic
requires applying additional knowledge. However, a good schematic
contains enough information to construct a functional circuit assuming
common engineering experience.

Schematic signals are often named to convey intended purpose of a
connection. In digital circuits, a bar over a name or a slash in front
of it indicates an *active-low* signal in which the low-voltage state is
the *active* state. The meaning of active is relative to the specific
case: for example, an input labeled /RESET is active-low, so a
zero-voltage input is “active” in the sense that the circuit is reset
(and hence not operating).

Reference Links
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#. `Wikipedia: resistor color
   code <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electronic_color_code>`__
#. `Wikipedia: voltage
   divider <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voltage_divider>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Kirchhoff's circuit
   laws <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kirchhoff%27s_circuit_laws>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Light emitting
   diode <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Light_emitting_diode>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Photoresistor <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cds_cell>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Force-sensing
   resistor <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Force_Sensitive_Resistor>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Relay <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relay>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Transistor <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transistor>`__
#. `Wikipedia: MOSFET <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MOSFET>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Integrated
   circuit <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_circuit>`__
#. `Wikipedia: Logic level <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logic_level>`__


