.. include:: links.rst

.. _laser-cutter:

IDeATe Laser Cutter Guide
=========================

The IDeATe\@Hunt fabrication facility includes three `Rabbit laser cutters`_.
These are extremely useful tools for cutting complex 2D forms.  The best feature
of these tools is the speed with which an idea can be tested: it is possible to
conceive of a part, create a 2D drawing, output a DXF, and cut material to make
a functional part within *minutes*.

The laser cuts flat materials such as cardboard, fabric, paper, MDF, plywood,
and acrylic.  It is however *limited* to these materials and other commmon
materials are unsafe to cut due either to fire or chemical hazard.

Before you begin, please review the `IDeATe@Hunt Laser Cutter Policy`_. **You
are responsible for understanding and following all details of the policy.**

Instructions for preparing design files to cut can be found below under
:ref:`laser-cutter-cad`.  The general instructions for operating the cutter can
be found under `IDeATe@Hunt Laser Cutter Procedure`_.

General information on the cutters can be found under `IDeATe@Hunt Rabbit Laser
Cutters`_.  Materials available for puchase at the desk can be found at the
`IDeATe@Hunt Material Inventory`_.

Process Overview
----------------

Laser cutters are intrinsically two-dimensional tools: a focused beam of
infrared laser light (e.g. invisible to the human eye) moves on an XY gantry
under computer control to trace out curves and lines.  The beam is turned on and
off to start and end lines during cutting.  It may also be used in a raster
engraving mode in which it sweeps an area while modulating the beam power very
quickly to vary the cut and create an image on the surface.

The fundamental cutting process is *melting* or *burning* from the heat
resulting from absorbing the energy of the light.  An air jet blows downwards
into the cut area to help move melted material out of the cut before it
resolidifies.  The cutter bed can be moved up or down prior to cutting to place
the top plane of the flat material at the focal point of the laser.

.. _laser-cutter-cad:

Laser Cutter Files
------------------

The most up-to-date hints for preparing files is included in the guide offered
by the Rapid Prototyping Technologies course under `15-294 Rabbit Laser
Instructions`_.

A printed copy may also be found in a binder in the laser cutter room, or can be
read on a browser on the laser cutter station computers.

File Formats
------------

The best format for a cutting plan drawing is `DXF`_ with millimeter units and
1:1 scale.  The key rule is that every line on the drawing will create a cut in
the material, so make sure there are no stray marks, text, annotations, frames,
or labels.  These files are 2D drawings, so can be generated from drawing
programs such as Inkscape or Illustrator, 2D CAD programs such as DraftSight, or
3D CAD such as SolidWorks or Rhino by creating the appropriate 2D drawing
outputs.


Design Rules
------------

The typical kerf in thin acrylic can be 0.005 to 0.010 inches and is slightly
tapered, so parts typically are slightly smaller than the designed form and the
edges are not perfectly square.

Even though the parts are flat, complex 3D structures can be created by using
tabs and slots to connect part edges to part faces.

For other hints, see :ref:`cad-cam-resources`.

Best Practices
--------------

#. If the laser cutter catches on fire, use the **Carbon Dioxide fire
   extinguisher** (CO\ :sub:`2` for Class C fire) located nearby.  This is very
   short-range: the nozzle will need to be approximately over the machine.

#. Small flames in cardboard can usually just be blown out with your breath.
   Even acrylic can sometimes generate a brief flame.  **Never use
   polycarbonate, it will burn.**

#. Thick acrylic cuts can tend to re-fuse, so it is best to remove your parts
   promptly from the cutter and use a tool to press out all the small pieces.
   Careful, acrylic is brittle and can crack.

#. Be sure to wash your hands after handling freshly cut acrylic, it leaves a
   residue.


Errata
------

#. The instructions refer to checking the "equipment room behind the laser
   cutters", but that door is generally locked with physical key access only.

References
----------

  * `IDeATe Rabbit Laser Power Setting Guide (Google Sheet) <https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1tsSP6Nljp4vG9elcsIx2tIaj4EGDh8XZRufn1y12Hx4/pubhtml>`__
  * `15-294 Rabbit Laser Instructions`_
  * `IDeATe@Hunt Laser Cutter Policy`_    
  * `IDeATe@Hunt Laser Cutter Procedure`_
  * `IDeATe@Hunt Rabbit Laser Cutters`_
  * `IDeATe@Hunt Material Inventory`_
  * `Rabbit USA LaserCut software manual <http://www.rabbitlaserusa.com/Manuals/User%20Manual(DSP5.3).pdf>`__
  * `Rabbit USA Power Settings Guide <http://www.rabbitlaserusa.com/Manuals/SpeedsFeeds_RL.pdf>`__
